the next segment is going to be about a
specific
variety more followed
molarity we want to be able to identify
the two words are morphologically
related and this is typically done
through a process name stemming so words
with the same hood have usually similar
meanings so for example the word scan in
its base form can also be converted into
scans scanned or scanning which are
different forms of inflection the first
one could be a fluoro or third person
singular verb second what is the past
tense the third one is a gerund it can
also add a suffix or an ending like ER
which forms a derived word a noun in
this particular case we can also have
derived forms that use prefixes for
example the verb rescan means to scan
something for a second time then we can
have combinations of derived and
inflected forms such as we scan which
has both a prefix for derivation and a
suffix for inflections the process of
stemming is to take a word and to
convert it into a base form which is
known as the stem after removing all the
different suffixes and endings and
sometimes performing some additional
transformations in practice the prefixes
are often preserved so we scan will not
be stamped to scan now let's look at
some examples we want to convert the
past and scan into the base form scan
and we also want to convert the noun
indication into the base form of the
verb indicate so this way if we want to
find the similarity between two
sentences we would consider scanner scan
to be more similar than two random words
and indicate an indication again more
similar than any other words so the
method that is used a lot in the natural
language communities called Porter's
methods it was introduced by Martin
Porter in 1980 in a paper called
an algorithm for suffix tripping that
has been cited more than 7,000 times
according to Google Scholar so this is a
pretty fundamental method Porter's
method is a rule-based it doesn't use
any machine learning or training it only
works for English and it was generated
were generated manually the input of the
algorithm is an individual word such as
indicates and then the output is the
stem of that word which is obtained by
performing a series of transformations
on the original word one caveat is that
porter stemmer sometimes can be wrong
and there are some well-known cases that
always have to be fixed in
post-processing let's look at terms of
few examples of Porter's algorithm the
first example starts with computational
and produces as output the word compute
now you may say that compute spelled Co
MP UT is not a word if that is correct
it is the stem of the word computational
and we want to be able to take the word
computer and produce the same stem
computer Co MP UT so at the end of the
day computation on computer will be
stamped exactly the same way so their
similarity in the stem space will be
perfect so one of the important aspects
of Porter's algorithm is the concept of
a measure of a word so a measure of a
word or string is an indication rough
indication of the number of syllables in
it it doesn't measure exactly the number
of syllables but it approximates that
number so let's take with a simple word
like cat we're going to think about it
as a sequence of vowels and consonants
so the first C is a constant the second
a is a vowel the third T is a consonant
as well so we have a CVC sequence if
instead we had the word cats we would
still count it as a CVC sequence because
in Portas algorithm the number of
adjacent consonants doesn't matter and
the number of adjacent vowels doesn't
matter either now the measure of a word
tells you how many sequences of VCs
we have in the representation so if you
look at the last bullet you can see that
any word can be represented as an
optional sequence of consonants C
followed by any number of VC sequences
followed by an optional V
or in other words we can abbreviate the
middle portion of VC VC dot dot - VC
with a suffix K which tells you that VC
is repeated K times so let's look at a
few examples of measures the first line
shows you five examples where K is equal
to zero you can see that for example the
word 2 has the wrong sequence it has a
consonant followed by a vowel and not
vowel followed by cohn so therefore it
doesn't have a measure of 1 it has a
measure of 0 the same thing applies to
Glee which has again a sequence of
constants followed by a sequence of vows
which again matches the pattern for k
equals 0 on the next line we have k
equals 1 or is vowel for back consonant
so that matches the pattern on the
previous slide East is a sequence of
vowels followed by a sequence of
consonants and it matches the pattern as
well the word street starts with an
optional consonant and then has a
sequence of vowels and a sequence of
constant so it's also according to the
definition on the previous slide a match
k equals 1 and finally we can have long
words with K to 3 and larger for example
the word easternmost has a measure of 3
because it has a foul sequence EA
followed by a consonant sequence s T
that's the first part of the measure
then e followed by our nm that's the
second part and finally all followed by
s T which is the third part supporters
algorithm starts by taking the word and
checking it against the sequence of
transformational patterns in order or in
other words this is some sort of a
decision list the rules are ordered so
if you start from the beginning
the first rule which has a left-hand
side that matches your current
representation of the word is going to
be applied and then a certain
transformation is going to be made to
the current word so for example a row
can be of this form if the measure of
the word is greater than 0
asian should be conflated to 8 so this
will take
to account the transformation of
medication to medicate or dedication to
dedicate however it's not going to
convert nation to Nate because the
measure of nation is not greater than
zero I should note that the measure is
measured only for the portion of the
words that is not listed in the pattern
so nation is really end followed by
Asian so we want the part on the left
hand side n to have a measure greater
than zero and that is not the case and
has a measure of zero so when the
pattern matches the word is transformed
and the algorithm when it starts from
the beginning of the list of patterns
with the newly transformed world and
this is repeated until there are no
rules that match in the whole sequence
of rules at that point the algorithm
stops and it outputs the most recently
transformed version of the world so
let's look at a more complicated example
the first four lines of the slide show
you who's that belong to step one a of
Porter's algorithm for example SS es
gets transformed to SS at the end of the
word
IES gets transformed to I and so on now
you asked for that why does IES get
respond to a and not for example to Y so
for example if a word is weekly it's
Pluto is weeklies IES we want those two
forms weekly singular and weekly
Explorer to both be stem the same way so
this conversion to Li takes that into
account so it could convert IES to I and
Y with a separate role that is not shown
here also to I so both words will be
stamped to weekly w ee k li now step one
be includes rules of this form if the
measure is greater than zero that
perform a certain type of transformation
so refereed changes to referee because
the measure of refer is greater than
zero but this rule doesn't apply to
bleed because the measure of BL is zero
now some of the rules in step two
a tional becomes 8 for example inflation
or turns into inflate if a snow doesn't
match but tion al matches then that gets
converted to tion you can see that the
order of the holes really matters
because if we had the rule for tion al
first and then a tional obviously the
second rule will never apply here we are
essentially taking care of the special
case a tional and then if the word
doesn't match that pattern then only do
we go to the next pattern tion al and
you should be able to look at the rest
of the examples on the slide and figure
out what kind of words they apply to so
evilness gets converted to iv'e so for
example forgiveness would turn into
forgive attentiveness to attentive and
so on step 3 includes more rules let's
look at a few examples eek 8 turns into
Isis or appliqud becomes a flick a
thief becomes blank that's what this
slash 0 of 5 symbol means so for example
informative gets turned into inform so
in step 4 we have other endings so for
example a L at the end of a word
typically indicates a specific type of
noun or adjective and it can be skipped
so appraisal becomes a praise hands as
in conductance
it can also be skipped so that turns
conductance into conduct
the next rule is about ER at the end
which again for words of sufficient
length measure greater than 1 if it
applies it will remove the suffix ER
altogether so container will be changed
to contain let's now look at the long
word that will need to go through the
list of rules multiple times before it
gets stamped completely so if the word
is computational we're going to start
from the first row in the list and we'll
find the first matching pattern as part
of step 2 and that tells us to replace a
tional with 8 so we're going to change
computational to compute 8 which is not
a word but we don't care about this
because we're still not done with the
stemming process
instead what we want is to go back to
the beginning of the list of goals and
look for a role that matches competative
if the measure is longer than a certain
number we can obtain the final eight
with blank and get compute Co amputee
out of computing at this point we go
back to the beginning of the list of
rules and we realize that there are no
other rules that apply and we stop here
and produce compute as the standard the
second example is simpler the word
computer only matches a specific role
that is part of step four of the porter
stemmer and that thousands to top the
final ER and get compute Co amputee the
same as for computational and this is
really the lesson to learn here we
wanted those two words to stand to the
exact same representation and Porter's
algorithm makes sure that they do if you
just an importance algorithm in more
detail I suggest that you go to this
website here on top which has an online
demo of the algorithm you can type any
text and get an output from it you can
also read the original paper by Martin
Porter and I download implementations of
Porter's algorithm in many different
programming languages such as Python C++
Java and so on and one additional link
that is not showing here is the natural
language toolkit which I've mentioned
elsewhere which also contains an
implementation of the port every time so
let's have a short quiz now I want to
give you four words construction
increasing unexplained and
differentiable I want you to take a
minute and look at the original Porter
paper or possibly the code of the
stammer itself and figure out what the
output should be you can do this either
by running the code or by tracing it
manually look at the output that you get
and think whether that is what we
expected and if not try to think why I'm
going to give you an answer on the next
slide so the question was to find how
the porter stemmer stands the words
construction increasing unexplained and
differentiable well here's what it does
it converts construction to construct
which is good stem increasing to
increase without the e
which again is a good stand because the
final e in the verb increase is not part
of the stem and explained becomes
unexplained so this may be different
from what you would expect you may
expect that you would get explained as
the stem but as I mentioned earlier
Porter's algorithm explicitly does not
take into account prefixes it only
removes characters from the end of the
world
and finally differentiable turns into
differentiy which is probably not the
stem that you expected and I would
classify this example as one of the
places where Porter's algorithm for
short now there was a problem in
Macklowe in 2008 by egg back on stemming
when you have a minute please download
this problem and try to solve it at home
the solution to the thorny stems poland
by eric back is available at this URL if
you try to solve it yourselves you can
check your solution now so in the next
segment we are going to talk about
another type of lexical similarity
specifically the concept of added
distance and the dynamic programming
methods that I use to compute edit
distance